\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename udunits-2.info
@settitle UDUNITS-2 Manual
@c %**end of header
@dircategory Science
@direntry
* udunits-2: (udunits-2).  The Unidata package for units of physical quantities.
@end direntry
@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2007 University Corporation for Atmospheric Research

@quotation
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its
documentation for any purpose without fee is hereby granted, provided
that the above copyright notice appears in all copies, that both that
copyright notice and this permission notice appear in supporting
documentation, and that the name of the University Corporation for
Atmospheric Research (UCAR) not be used in advertising or publicity
pertaining to distribution of the software without specific, written
prior permission.  UCAR makes no representations about the suitability
of this software for any purpose.  It is provided ``as is'' without
express or implied warranty.  It is provided with no support and without
obligation on the part of UCAR to assist in its use, correction,
modification, or enhancement.
@end quotation
@end copying

@titlepage
@title The UDUNITS-2 Package
@author Steven R. Emmerson

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@top UDUNITS-2
This manual introduces the UDUNITS-2 package, which contains
a C library for units of physical quantities and a unit-definition
and value-conversion utility.

CVS keywords: $Date: 2007/04/02 21:29:48 $, Revision: 1.3 $

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::        Introduction
* Obtain::              Obtaining the package
* Install::             Installing the package
* Complete Index::      Complete index
@end menu

@node Introduction, Obtain, Top, Top
@chapter Introduction
@cindex Introduction

The UDUNITS-2 package provides support for units of physical quantities.
Its three main components are: 1) @ref{Top, , a C library, udunits2lib}
for units of physical quantities;
2) @ref{Top, , a utility, udunits2prog};
for obtaining the definition of a unit and for
converting numeric values between compatible units;
and 3) an extensive database of units.

@node Obtain, Install, Introduction, Top
@chapter Obtaining the Package
@cindex obtaining the package

Get the package from its home-page at
@uref{http://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/udunits/}
and unpack it someplace convenient, e.g.,

@example
cd /tmp
gunzip -c udunits-2.0.tar.gz | tar -xf -
@end example

@node Install, Complete Index, Obtain, Top
@chapter Installing the Package
@cindex installing the package

@menu
* Short::        Short intallation instructions
* Long::         Long installation instructions
* What::         What gets installed
@end menu

@node Short, Long, , Install
@section Short Installation Instructions
The following assumes that you are familiar with autoconf-based
package-installation.
If you're not, then follow the long instructions in the
next section.

@example
./configure [--prefix=<dir>] [--disable-shared] [CC=...]
make
make check
make install
make install-info install-html install-pdf
make clean
@end example

If you encounter problems, then follow the instructions in the
next section.

@node Long, What, Short, Install
@section Long Installation Instructions

@enumerate
@item
Go to the top-level source-directory of the package, e.g.,
@example
cd udunits-2.0
@end example

@item
If necessary, clean-up from a previous installation attempt with the
command
@example
make distclean
@end example

@item
In the following table of successful package installations,
find your operating system and compiler and identify any
required option for the @code{configure} script.
@quotation
@include success.texi
@end quotation

The option @code{--disable-shared} causes the build process to create
a static library only.
This is necessary if the @code{libtool} utility can't build a shared
library using the given compiler.

The following table shows the build environments that do not work ---
so don't use them:
@quotation
@include failure.texi
@end quotation

@item
Execute the @code{configure} script.
Specify the installation prefix, the compiler from the
previous step, and any required option.
For example, if you are on an HP-UX system and want to use
the @code{/bin/c89} compiler and install under @code{/opt},
then the following command is appropriate:
@example
./configure --prefix=/opt --disable-shared CC=/bin/c89
@end example

If the installation prefix is not specified, then the default
is to install under @code{/usr/local}.

If the compiler isn't specified, then the default is to use
@code{gcc}.

@item
Build the package with the command
@example
make
@end example

@item
Install the library, header-files, units-database, and utility with
the command
@example
make install
@end example

@item
If desired, install the documentation with one or more of the commands
@example
make install-info
make install-html
make install-pdf
@end example

@item
Clean up with the command
@example
make clean
@end example
@end enumerate

@node What, , Long, Install
@section What Gets Installed

The following files are created or installed under the installation
directory:

@example
bin/:
udunits2                # Unit utility

include/:
converter.h             # API for value converters
udunits2.h              # API for units

lib/:
libudunits2.a           # Static unit library
libudunits2.la          # libtool(1) reference for unit library
libudunits2.so          # Link to shared library
libudunits2.so.0        # Link to shared library
libudunits2.so.0.0.0    # Shared library

share/:
doc                     # Directory. Created if it doesn't exist
info                    # Directory. Created if it doesn't exist
udunits2.xml            # Default unit database

share/doc:
udunits                 # Directory. Created if it doesn't exist

share/doc/udunits:
udunits-2.html          # HTML documentation on the unit package
udunits2lib.html        # HTML documentation on the unit library
udunits2lib.pdf         # PDF documentation on the unit library
udunits-2.pdf           # PDF documentation on the unit package
udunits2prog.html       # HTML documentation on the unit utility
udunits2prog.pdf        # PDF documentation on the unit utility

share/info:
dir                     # Top-level "info" file.  Created if it doesn't exist
udunits-2.info          # INFO documentation on the unit package
udunits2lib.info        # INFO documentation on the unit library
udunits2prog.info       # INFO documentation on the unit utility
@end example

@node Complete Index, , Install, Top
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye
